WIRELESS NETWORKING IN

THE DEVELOPING WORLD

Third Edition

 

Wireless Networking in the Developing World

For more information about this project please visit
[http://wndw.net](http://wndw.net/)

 

First Edition, January 2006

Second Edition, December 2007

Third Edition, February 2013

 

Many designations used by manufacturers and vendors to distinguish their
products are claimed as trademarks. Where those designations appear in
this book, and the authors were aware of a trademark claim, the
designations have been printed in all caps or initial caps. All other
trademarks are property of their respective owners. The authors and
publisher have taken due care in preparation of this book, but make no
expressed or implied warranty of any kind and assume no responsibility
for errors or omissions. No liability is assumed for incidental or
consequential damages in connection with or arising out of the use of
the information contained herein.

As we have discovered the developing world of wireless networking is all
around us, the authors of this book have included projects in North
America, Europe, and in Asia, South America, India and Africa. So we
have come to the conclusion that most places have the potential to find
affordable indoor and outdoor wireless networks useful. We hope you
enjoy reading this book and use it as the starting point of a wireless
project in your community.

The book and PDF file are published under a Creative Commons
Attribution-ShareAlike 3.0 license. This allows anyone to make copies,
and even sell them for a profit, as long as proper attribution is given
to the authors and any derivative works are made available under the
same terms.

 

Any copies or derivative works must include a prominent link to our
website, [http://wndw.net/](http://wndw.net/)

See
[http://creativecommons.org/licenses/b](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0/)[y](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0/)[-](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0/)[sa/3.0/](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0/)
for more information about these terms.

 

ISBN-13: 978-1484039359

![](src/cc-by-sa.png)

 

Wireless Networking in the Developing World by The WNDW Authors is
licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution -ShareAlike 3.0

Unported License.

ABOUT THIS BOOK
---------------

 

This third version of this book was started as a BookSprint in September
2011 in the beautiful city of Copenhagen hosted by Sebastian Buettrich,
who is one of the authors.

 

A core team of eight people then finished this version over the
following months leading to publication in March 2013.

 

Throughout the project, the core group has actively solicited
contributions and feedback from the wireless networking community
worldwide. You can provide your own feedback or post technical questions
to the authors at our Facebook page:

[https://www.facebook.com/groups/wirelessu](https://www.facebook.com/groups/wirelessu/)

 

This book is available as an eBook for your mobile device, or it is
downloadable from the website [http://wndw.net/](http://wndw.net/) for
free (high and low resolution available), or it can be ordered as a
printed book from [http://www.lulu.com/](http://www.lulu.com/)

 

We do give out a copy to every student who attends a wireless training
course given by all of the Institutions we work with such as the
International Centre for Theoretical Physics (ICTP), the Network Startup
Resource Center (NSRC), the Asian Institute of Technology (AIT), The
Internet Society (ISOC) and AirJaldi, to name just a few.

And we would all strongly encourage you to sign up for a local course.

 

For information about upcoming courses or if you would like to arrange a
course in your region, please contact the editor, Jane
Butler[janesbutler@networktheworld.org](mailto:janesbutler@networktheworld.org)

 

If you are planning a wireless project and you need a copy of this book
and can neither download it as you have limited bandwidth nor afford to
order it online, please send an email to Jane or send a message on
Facebook and we'll mail a printed copy to you.

 

### Core Contributors

Jane Butler, who is lead editor of this version of the book. Jane is
currently President of the private Foundation called networktheworld.org
which promotes and supports the growth of Internet connectivity around
the world mainly by supporting wireless projects and training
[http://wirelessu.org](http://wirelessu.org/). Jane is also head of
industrial collaboration and outreach at University College London. Jane
holds an Honours Degree in Engineering, is a Chartered Engineer and
Fellow of the Institution of Electronics and Technology.

Jane can be reached at
[janesbutler@networktheworld.org](mailto:janesbutler@networktheworld.org)

 

The editor would like to acknowledge and thank the core group of
contributors who are listed below -

 

Ermanno Pietrosemoli. Ermanno is currently a researcher at the
Telecommunications/ICT for Development Lab of the International Centre
for Theoretical Physics in Trieste, Italy, and President of Fundación
Escuela Latinoamericana de Redes "EsLaRed", a non- profit organization
that promotes ICT in Latin America through training and development
projects. EsLaRed was awarded the 2008 Jonathan B. Postel Service Award
by the Internet Society. Ermanno has been deploying wireless data
communication networks focusing on low cost technology, and has
participated in the planning and building of wireless data networks in
Argentina, Colombia, Ecuador, Italy, Lesotho, Malawi, Mexico, Morocco,
Nicaragua, Peru, Trinidad, U.S.A. and Venezuela. He has presented in
many conferences and published several papers related to wireless data
communication and is coauthor and technical reviewer of the book
"Wireless Networking for the Developing World" freely available from
http://wndw.net. Ermanno holds a Master's Degree from Stanford
University and was Professor of Telecommunications at Universidad de los
Andes in Venezuela from 1970 to 2000.

Ermanno can be reached at [ermanno@ictp.it](mailto:ermanno@ictp.it)

 

Marco Zennaro. Marco received his M.Sc. Degree in Electronic Engineering
from University of Trieste in Italy. He defended his PhD thesis on
“Wireless Sensor Networks for Development: Potentials and Open Issues”
at KTH-Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm, Sweden.

His research interest is in ICT4D, the use of ICT for Development.

In particular, he is interested in Wireless Networks and in Wireless
Sensor Networks in developing countries. He has been giving lectures on
Wireless technologies in more than 20 different countries. When not
travelling, he is the editor of
[wsnblog.](http://objavi.booki.cc/tmp/wirelessnetworkinginthedevelopingworld-en-2013.02.13-23.20.02.odtQlyYWy/list-of-contributors/wsnblog.com)com.
Marco can be reached at [mzennaro@ictp.it](mailto:mzennaro@ictp.it)

 

Carlo Fonda is a member of the Radio Communications Unit at the Abdus
Salam International Center for Theoretical Physics in Trieste, Italy.
Carlo can be reached at [cfonda@ictp.it](mailto:cfonda@ictp.it)

 

Stephen Okay. Steve is a geek-of-all-trades with over 20 years of
experience in systems/network programming and administration with a
particular passion for free/open networks and software. He has deployed
wireless networks in Laos, Malawi, Italy, and the United States. He is
an Inveneo co-founder and has taught workshops on VoIP and wireless
networking at Institutions around the world. He lives and hacks in San
Francisco, California. Steve can be reached at
[steve@inveneo.org](mailto:steve@inveneo.org)

 

Corinna "Elektra" Aichele. Elektra has been busy working on mesh
networking protocols for the Freifunk community in Germany. Before
inventing the B.A.T.M.A.N. routing protocol for wireless mesh networks
in 2006, she was working on improving the OLSR routing protocol. She is
one of the people behind the Mesh-Potato device, a rugged outdoor
open-source and open-hardware WiFi router with an FXS port. She is part
of the Villagetelco community, that strives to deploy mesh networks for
VOIP and data. She lives in a solar-powered home in Berlin, Germany. The
philosophy behind her ideas about ubiquitous communication for everyone
is: "The fact that you talk in your head doesn't mean that you think -
but only that you speak with yourself". Elektra can be reached
at[](mailto:elektra@villagetelco.org)[elektra@villagetelco.org](mailto:elektra@villagetelco.org)

[http://villagetelco.org](http://villagetelco.org/)

[http://open-mesh.net/](http://open-mesh.net/)

 

Sebastian Buettrich. Sebastian is Research Lab Manager at the IT
University of [Copenhagen, http://pit.itu.dk](http://pit.itu.dk/)

He works with embedded/pervasive systems, wireless technology, open
source / free software and solar energy to build networks, systems,
skills and capacity as a manager, developer, architect, consultant and
teacher.

This work focused on (but not limited to) developing countries and
communities, especially in Asia and Africa. One current focus is to help
develop campus networks for research and education, with emphasis on
global integration and sustainability. His current side affiliations
are:
[http://www.nsrc.org](http://www.nsrc.org/)[](http://www.nsrc.org/)- the
Network Startup Resource Center
[http://wire.less.dk](http://wire.less.dk/)[](http://wire.less.dk/)- NGO
and company co-founded with Tomas Krag
[http://wirelessU.org](http://wirelessu.org/)[](http://wirelessu.org/)-
a group of dedicated professionals working towards a world-wide,
people-centered, inclusive Information Society
[http://wndw.](http://wndw.net/)net/ - Co-author of the Wireless
Networking in the Developing World book. Sebastian holds a Ph.D. in
Quantum Physics from the Technical University of Berlin in Germany, with
a focus on optics, radio spectroscopy, photovoltaic systems and
scientific programming. He loves and plays music, is fascinated and
engaged with text, language and poetry in many forms. Sebastian can be
reached at [sebastian@less.dk](mailto:sebastian@less.dk)

Jim Forster. Jim is passionate about extending the Internet. He started
at Cisco in 1988 when it was quite small and spent 20 years there,
mostly in IOS Software Development and System Architecture, and becoming
a Distinguished Engineer. While at Cisco he started working on projects
and policies to improve Internet access in developing countries. Now he
is engaged in both for-profit and non-profit efforts to extend
communications in Africa and India. He founded networktheworld.org, a
foundation dedicated to improving communications and Internet,
especially in Africa and India. He is on several Board of Directors,
including Range Networks / OpenBTS and Inveneo in the US, Esoko Networks
in Ghana, and AirJaldi in India. Jim can be reached
at[jforster@networktheworld.org](mailto:jforster@networktheworld.org)

 

Klaas Wierenga. Klaas works in the Research and Advanced Development
group at Cisco Systems where he focuses on Identity, Security and
Mobility topics, often in collaboration with the Research and Education
Community. He is co-author of the Cisco Press book "Building the Mobile
Internet". Prior to joining Cisco he worked at SURFnet, the Dutch
Research and Education Network, where he created the global WiFi roaming
service in academia called eduroam. He is also the Chair of the Mobility
Task Force of TERENA, the European association of R&E Networks. Klaas
participates in a number of IETF working groups in the fields of
identity, security and mobility and chairs the abfab working group that
deals with federated identity for non-web applications. He can be
reached
at[](mailto:klaas@wierenga.net)[klaas@wierenga.net](mailto:klaas@wierenga.net)

Eric Vyncke. Since 1997, Eric has worked as a Distinguished Engineer at
Cisco in the field of security by assisting customers to deploy secure
networks. Since 2005, Eric has also been active in the IPv6 area, he is
notably the co-chair of the Belgian IPv6 Council and has a well-known
site for monitoring IPv6 deployments:
[http://www.vyncke.org/ipv6status](http://www.vyncke.org/ipv6status/)/

He is also Associate Professor at the University of Liège in Belgium. He
participates in several IETF working groups related to security or to
IPv6. Eric can be reached at [eric@vyncke.org](mailto:eric@vyncke.org)

 

Bruce Baikie. Bruce is a member of the Broadband for Good team at
Inveneo as Senior Director Broadband Initiatives. He is leveraging his
extensive experience in the energy and telecom industries, and 16 years
at Sun Microsystems as telecom industry expert to advise on implementing
solar powered ICT4D projects. His areas of expertise include: wireless
networking, eco-data centers, DC telecom power systems, and solar power.
Bruce has published numerous white papers and articles on green data
center operations and solar power in ICT4D. His educational background
includes a B.S. in Mechanical Engineering from Michigan Technological
University and advanced studies in International Business from the
University of Wisconsin. Bruce is also a guest lecturer on solar powered
ICT4D at the Abdus Salam International Centre for Theoretical Physics in
Trieste, Italy. During past two years, Bruce has been mentoring
engineering students from Illinois Institute of Technology, University
of Colorado-Boulder, San Francisco State University, and San Jose State
University in ICT4D design and projects in Haiti, West Africa, and
Micronesia. Bruce can be reached at bruce@green-wifi.org

 

Laura Hosman. Laura is Assistant Professor of Political Science at
Illinois Institute of Technology. Prior to IIT, Professor Hosman held
postdoctoral research fellow positions at the University of California,
Berkeley and the University of Southern California (USC). She graduated
with a PhD in Political Economy and Public Policy from USC. Her current
research focuses on the role of information and communications
technology (ICT) in developing countries, particularly in terms of its
potential effects on socio-cultural factors, human development, and
economic growth.

Her work focuses on two main areas: Public-Private Partnerships and
ICT-in-education, both with a focus on the developing world.

Her blog, giving insights on her fieldwork experiences, is at

http://ict4dviewsfromthefield.wordpress.com

Michael Ginguld. Founder, Director - Strategy and Operations, Rural
Broad Band Pvt. Ltd.Co-Founder, CEO, AirJaldi Research and Innovation.
Michael was born and raised in Kibbutz Kissufim in Israel. He has more
than 20 years of experience working in ICT, community and rural
development projects in India, Indonesia, Cambodia, Nepal, and Israel.

Michael worked in the non-profit and for- profit sectors with start-up
grassroots organizations, advocacy groups, large international NGOs and
commercial enterprises working in developing countries.

Michael worked and lived in Dharamsala between 1998 and 2002 and
returned to India in the beginning of 2007 to join a rural connectivity
initiative that eventually led to the creation of AirJaldi Research and
Innovation, a non-profit organization dedicated to R&D and capacity
building work in the field of Wireless networks in 2007, and of RBB, a
for-profit working on the design, deployment and management of rural
broad band networks in rural areas, in 2009. Michael holds a B.Sc. in
Ag. Economics from the Hebrew University., Jerusalem, Israel, an MA in
Development Studies from the Institute of Social Studies, the Hague, the
Netherlands, and an MA in Public Administration from the Kennedy School
of Government, Harvard University, Cambridge, USA. Michael is based in
Dharamsala, Himachal Pradesh, India.

He can be reached at [Michael@airjaldi.net](mailto:Michael@airjaldi.net)

 

Emmanuel Togo. Emmanuel is from Ghana, and earned his first degree in
Computer Science and Physics from University of Ghana in 1999. He
currently works as the Head of the Networking Unit of the University of
Ghana's Computing Systems (UGCS).

He is also a founding member of the Ghanaian Academic and Research
Network's (GARNET) technical team working to build the national research
and education network in Ghana. Emmanuel's current focus is designing
and deploying an affordable, large-scale campus-wide WiFi network in
Ghana. Emmanuel can be reached at
[ematogo@ug.edu.gh](mailto:ematogo@ug.edu.gh)

 

The Open Technology Institute, (who provided a case study), strengthens
individuals and communities through policy research, applied learning,
and technological innovation.

 

 

### Support

The editorial team would especially like to recognise the support of our
technical illustrator, Paolo Atzori, who has over several months worked
tirelessly to ensure the book has some wonderful, as well as accurate,
easy to read illustrations. He has also ensured that we've been able to
publish successfully several versions of the book in high and low
resolution format.

 

Paolo Atzori. Paolo studied Architecture in Venice and Rome and Media
Arts in Cologne. After working as an architect in Vienna, Paolo
collaborated with the Cologne Academy of Media Arts (KHM); At NABA,
Milan he was named the Director of the Master Digital Environment Design
and Advisor of the PhD program of the Planetary Collegium, M- Node. He
has created many theatrical and artistic projects, introducing new
representations of space characterised by the dynamics of pervasiveness
and interaction.

Paolo has also curated exhibitions dedicated to digital arts, directed
educational programs, and published articles and essays on digital
culture.

He has lived and worked in Venice, Rome, New York, Vienna, Cologne,
Brussels, Tel Aviv. Since 2005 he has lived with his partner Nicole and
their children Alma and Zeno in Trieste, Italy. In 2011 he founded with
Nicole Leghissa the Agency "Hyphae”.

[http://hyphae.org](http://hyphae.org/)

[http://vimeo.com/groups/xtendedlab/videos](http://vimeo.com/groups/xtendedlab/videos)

[http://www.xtendedlab.com/](http://www.xtendedlab.com/)

[http://www.khm.de/\~Paolo](http://www.khm.de/%7EPaolo)

### Authors and editors of earlier versions of the book

Rob Flickenger. Rob has written and edited several books about wireless
networking and Linux, including Wireless Hacks (O’Reilly) and How To
Accelerate Your Internet ([http://bwmo.net/](http://bwmo.net/)). He is
proud to be a hacker, amateur mad scientist, and proponent of free
networks everywhere.

 

Laura M. Drewett is a Co-Founder of Adapted Consulting Inc., a social
enterprise that specialises in adapting technology and business
solutions for the developing world. Since Laura first lived in Mali in
the 1990s and wrote her thesis on girls’ education programs, she has
strived to find sustainable solutions for development.

Laura holds a Bachelors of Arts with Distinction in Foreign Affairs and
French from the University of Virginia and a Master’s Certificate in
Project Management from the George Washington University School of
Business.

 

Alberto Escudero-Pascual and Louise Berthilson are the founders of IT
+46, a Swedish consultancy company with focus on information technology
in developing regions. More information can be found at
[http://www.it46.se/](http://www.it46.se/)

 

Ian Howard. After flying around the world for seven years as a
paratrooper in the Canadian military, Ian Howard decided to trade his
gun for a computer. After finishing a degree in environmental sciences
at the University of Waterloo he wrote in a proposal, "Wireless
technology has the opportunity to bridge the digital divide. Poor
nations, who do not have the infrastructure for interconnectivity as we
do, will now be able to create a wireless infrastructure." As a reward,
Geekcorps sent him to Mali as the Geekcorps Mali Program Manager, where
he led a team equipping radio stations with wireless interconnections
and designed content sharing systems.

 

Kyle Johnston, [http://www.schoolnet.na/](http://www.schoolnet.na/)

 

Tomas Krag spends his days working with
[wire.less](http://objavi.booki.cc/tmp/wirelessnetworkinginthedevelopingworld-en-2013.02.13-23.20.02.odtQlyYWy/list-of-contributors/wire.less.dk).dk,
a registered non-profit, based in Copenhagen, which he founded with his
friend and colleague Sebastian Büttrich in early 2002. wire.less.dk
specialises in community wireless networking solutions, and has a
special focus on low-cost wireless networks for the developing world.
Tomas is also an associate of the Tactical Technology Collective
[http://www.tacticaltech.org](http://www.tacticaltech.org/), an
Amsterdam-based non-profit “to strengthen social technology movements
and networks in developing and transition countries, as well as promote
civil society’s effective, conscious and creative use of new
technologies.”

Currently most of his energy goes into the Wireless Roadshow
([http://www.thewirelessroadshow.org](http://www.thewirelessroadshow.org/)),
a project that supports civil society partners in the developing world
in planning, building and sustaining connectivity solutions based on
license-exempt spectrum, open technology and open knowledge.

 

 

Gina Kupfermann is graduate engineer in energy management and holds a
degree in engineering and business. Besides her profession as financial
controller she has worked for various self-organised community projects
and non-profit organisations. Since 2005 she is member of the executive
board of the development association for free networks, the legal entity
of freifunk.net

 

Adam Messer. Originally trained as an insect scientist, Adam Messer
metamorphosed into a telecommunications professional after a chance
conversation in 1995 led him to start one of Africa's first ISPs.
Pioneering wireless data services in Tanzania, Messer worked for 11
years in eastern and southern Africa in voice and data communications
for startups and multinational cellular carriers. He now resides in
Amman, Jordan.

 

Juergen Neumann ([http://www.ergomedia.de](http://www.ergomedia.de/))
started working with information technology in 1984 and since then has
been looking for ways to deploy ICT in useful ways for organizations and
society. As a consultant for ICT strategy and implementation, he worked
for major German and international companies and many non-profit
projects. In 2002 he co-founded
[www.freifunk.net,](http://www.freifunk.net/) for spreading knowledge
and social networking about free and open networks. Freifunk is globally
regarded as one of the most successful community-projects in this field.

 

Frédéric Renet is a co-founder of Technical Solutions at Adapted
Consulting, Inc. Frédéric has been involved in ICT for more than 10
years and has worked with computers since his childhood. He began his
ICT career in the early 1990s with a bulletin board system (BBS) on an
analog modem and has since continued to create systems that enhance
communication. Most recently, Frédéric spent more than a year at
IESC/Geekcorps Mali as a consultant. In this capacity, he designed many
innovative solutions for FM radio broadcasting, school computer labs and
lighting systems for rural communities.

 

 

Contents

ABOUT THIS BOOK        V

Core Contributors        VI

Support        XI

Authors and editors of earlier versions of the book        XI

INTRODUCTION        XXI

The country of Aipotu        XXI

Purpose of this book        XXII

Fitting wireless into your existing network        XXIV

How this book is organized        XXIV

PHYSICS

​1. RADIO PHYSICS        1

What is a wave?        1

Electromagnetic forces        3

Symbols of the international system of units        4

Phase        6

Polarization        7

The electromagnetic spectrum        8

Bandwidth        10

Frequencies and channels        10

Behaviour of radio waves        11

The Huygens Principle        12

Absorption        13

Reflection        14

Diffraction        15

Interference        17

Line of sight        19

Understanding the Fresnel zone        20

Power        23

Physics in the real world        25

​2. TELECOMMUNICATIONS BASICS        26

Modulation        32

Multiplexing and duplexing        33

Conclusions        35

​3. LICENSING AND REGULATION        36

Examples of relevant types of regulation        36

​4. RADIO SPECTRUM        40

What is the electromagnetic spectrum?        40

How is the spectrum adjudicated?        44

Political issues        46

Explosion in spectrum demand        46

Spectrum scarcity or spectrum hoarding?        49

IEE 802.22        50

Developing countries advantage        51

​5. ANTENNAS / TRANSMISSION LINES        54

Cables        56

Waveguides        58

Connectors and adapters        60

Antenna term glossary        63

Types of antennas        72

Reflector theory        80

Amplifiers        81

Practical antenna designs        82

Antenna measurements        82

NETWORKING       

​6. NETWORKING        85

Introduction        86

Cooperative communications        89

The OSI model        89

The TCP/IP model        91

The Internet Protocols        93

Internet Protocol Suite        112

Physical hardware        114

Putting it all together        120

Designing the physical network        121

​7. WIFI FAMILY        126

IEEE 802: What is it, and why should I care?        126

The 802.11 standard        128

Deployment planning for 802.11 wireless networks        129

The 802.22 Standard        131

Summary        133

​8. MESH NETWORKING        134

Introduction        134

Bandwidth impact of multi-hop relaying routes        137

Summary        137

Routing protocols for mesh networks        138

Devices and firmware for embedded devices        140

Frequently observed problems        143

​9. SECURITY FOR WIRELESS NETWORKS        146

Introduction        146

Protecting the wireless network        148

Physical security for wireless networks        150

Authentication and access control        152

Summary        157

802.1X        161

Inter-organisational roaming        163

End to end encryption        165

Tor & Anonymizers        173

PLANNING AND DEPLOYMENT       

​10. DEPLOYMENT PLANNING        177

Estimating capacity        177

Calculating the link budget        179

Link planning software        189

Avoiding noise        194

Repeaters        197

Deployment planning for IPv6        199

​11. HARDWARE SELECTION AND CONFIGURATION        201

Wired wireless        201

Choosing wireless components        203

Commercial vs. DIY solutions        205

Professional lightning protection        209

Access Point Configuration        212

Configure the client        221

Hints - working outdoors        221

Troubleshooting        222

​12. INDOOR INSTALLATION        223

Introduction        223

Preparations        223

Bandwidth requirements        224

Frequencies and data rates        224

Access Points choice and placement        225

SSID and Network Architecture        227

Post Installation        227

​13. OUTDOOR INSTALL        228

What is needed for a long distance link?        230

Antenna alignment        232

​14. OFF-GRID POWER        238

Solar Power        238

Photovoltaic system components        239

The solar panel        244

The battery        250

Temperature effects        257

The charge regulator        258

Converters        260

Equipment or load        262

Orientation of the panels        266

How to size your photovoltaic system        267

Data to collect        269

Electrical characteristics of system components        270

Procedure of calculation        272

Cables        276

Cost of a solar installation        277

MAINTENANCE, MONITORING AND SUSTAINABILITY       

​15. MAINTENANCE AND TROUBLESHOOTING        280

Introduction        280

Building your team        280

Proper troubleshooting techniques        283

Common network problems        286

Trouble tracking and reporting        293

 

​16. NETWORK MONITORING        295

Introduction        295

Network monitoring example        296

Detecting network outages        298

Monitoring your network        299

Types of monitoring tools        306

Network detection        307

Spot check tools        307

Protocol analysers        312

Trending tools        314

Throughput testing        322

Realtime tools and intrusion detection        325

Other useful tools        328

What is normal?        330

Establishing a baseline        331

Monitoring RAM and CPU usage        337

Summary        339

​17. ECONOMIC SUSTAINABILITY        340

Introduction        340

Create a mission statement        342

Evaluate the demand for potential offerings        343

Establish appropriate incentives        345

Research the regulatory environment for wireless        346

Analyse the competition        347

Determine initial and recurring costs and pricing        347

Categories of Costs        349

Secure the financing        351

Evaluate the strengths and weaknesses of the internal situation       
354

Putting it all together        355

Conclusion        358

 

GLOSSARY       

Glossary        360

 

 

APPENDICES       

APPENDIX A: ANTENNA CONSTRUCTION        393

Guidelines for building some simple types of antennas        393

Collinear omni        393

Cantenna        403

Cantenna as dish feed        410

NEC2        411

APPENDIX B: CHANNEL ALLOCATIONS        412

APPENDIX C: PATH LOSS        414

APPENDIX D: CABLE SIZES        415

APPENDIX E: SOLAR DIMENSIONING        416

Finding the Worst Month        420

Final Calculations        422

APPENDIX F: RESOURCES        424

CASE STUDIES       

Case Studies - Introduction        433

Equipment enclosures        433

Antenna masts        434

Involve the local community        434

Now read on        435

Case Study: Long Distance 802.11 in Venezuela        437

Introduction        437

Background        437

Action Plan        438

Pico del Aguila Site Survey        439

Antennas        441

El Baùl Site Survey        444

Mérida, Venezuela, 17 April 2006.        448

Can we do better?        448

Acknowledgments        450

 

 

Case Study: Pisces Project        452

Case Study: University Of Ghana campus wireless network        457

Introduction        457

Wifi setup and installation        458

Connecting to the UG campus wireless network        459

Pictures of our project and installation        460

Challenges we faced        464

Next steps        465

Case Study: Airjaldi's Garhwal Network, India        466

Introduction        466

Airjaldi’s Garhwal Network:        466

The Airjaldi Garhwal Network – Vital Statistics        467

Realities, needs        468

Summary        479

Case Study: Open Technology Institute        480

Red Hook initiative Wifi & Tidepools        480

History of the network        480

Social software and growth of the network        485

Expansion after superstorm Sandy        489

Sustainability & future goals        494

Cost of the network        494

Lessons learned        494

Related articles & websites        495

 

INTRODUCTION
------------

This book aims to empower people to build DIY networks using wireless
technologies. It has been compiled by a bunch of networking geeks that
have been busy designing, deploying and operating wireless networks for
quite some time, all of them actively participating in expanding the
reach of the Internet all over the world.

We believe that people can have a significant stake in building their
own communications infrastructure and also influence the wider community
around them to make sure networks become affordable and available.

We hope to not only convince you that this is possible, but also show
how we have done it, and to give you the information and tools you need
to start a network project in your local community.

By providing people in your local community with cheaper and easier
access to information, they will directly benefit from what the Internet
has to offer.

The time and effort saved by having access to the global network of
information translates into value on a local scale. Likewise, the
network becomes all the more valuable as more people are connected to
it. Communities connected to the Internet at high speed have a voice in
a global marketplace, where transactions happen around the world at the
speed of light.

People all over the world are finding that Internet access gives them a
voice to discuss their problems, politics, and whatever else is
important in their lives, in a way that the telephone and television
simply cannot compete. What has until recently sounded like science
fiction is now becoming a reality, and that reality is being built on
wireless networks.

### The country of Aipotu

Now lets for a moment look at a fictional country called 'Aipotu', in
the developing world. Aipotu has been connected to the Internet merely
by expensive VSAT links for a long time.

A brand new optical submarine telecommunications connection has finally
arrived at the shore of Aipotu.

The challenge for Aipotu is now to roll out a complete communication
infrastructure for a whole country from scratch.

 

The method of choice today is likely a three tier strategy. First and
foremost Aipotu should try to roll out optical fibre lines wherever
possible. Fibre lines offer the capability to transport a "sea of
bandwidth".

The cost of optical fibre is very low, considering the capacity. By
upgrading the optical transceivers the capacity of a optical fibre line
can be upgraded without laying new cable. If Aipotu can afford to
establish a fibre connection to every household there is no reason not
to go for it.

This would make our three tier model obsolete and we could stop here.
However, there are probably areas in Aipotu that cannot afford fibre
lines.

 

The second tier that the people of Aipotu can use in order to connect
remote villages or small cities are high speed point-to-point links
between high points. It is possible to establish high speed links (40
Mbps) of 30 km or more between towers of 30 metre height on flat
terrain.

If mountain tops, high buildings or hill tops are available, even longer
links are possible. The network technology experts of Aipotu don't have
to worry too much about the wireless technology that they are mounting
on top of their towers - the cost lies mostly in building the towers,
proper lightning protection, power supplies, power back-up and theft
protection, rather than in the actual wireless equipment and antennas.

Like the technology of optical transceivers, wireless transceivers also
keep advancing, but a wireless link will always be orders of magnitude
slower than the capacity of optical fibre.

 

The third challenge for Aipotu is to solve the problem of the last
mile(s): Distributing access to all the individual households, offices,
production facilities and so on. Not too long ago the method of choice
was to run copper wires but now there is a better choice. This third
tier of our network model is clearly the domain of wireless networking
technology.

### Purpose of this book

The overall goal of this book is to help you build affordable
communication technology in your local community by making best use of
whatever resources are available.

Using inexpensive off-the-shelf equipment, you can build high speed data
networks that connect remote areas together, provide broadband network
access in areas where even dialup does not exist, and ultimately connect
you and your neighbours to the global Internet.

By using local sources for materials and fabricating parts yourself, you
can build reliable network links with very little budget.

And by working with your local community, you can build a
telecommunications infrastructure that benefits everyone who
participates in it.

This book is not a guide to configuring wireless for your laptop or
choosing consumer grade gear for your home network. The emphasis is on
building infrastructure links intended to be used as the backbone for
wide area wireless networks as well as solving the last mile problem.

With those goals in mind, information is presented from many points of
view, including technical, social, and financial factors.

The extensive collection of case studies included present various
groups’ attempts at building these networks, the resources that were
committed to them, and the ultimate results of these attempts.

 

It is also important to note that all of the resources, techniques and
design methodologies described in this book are valid in any part of the
world. There are many rural parts all over the globe that remain
unconnected to the Internet for reasons of cost, geography, politics and
so on.

Deploying wireless networking can often lead to these problems being
solved thereby extending connectivity to those who as yet have not
achieved it. There are many community based networking projects emerging
everywhere. So whether you live in the United Kingdom, Kenya, Chile or
India or anywhere else, this book can be a useful practical guide.

 

Since the first spark gap experiments at the turn of the XIX century,
wireless has been a rapidly evolving area of communications technology.
While we provide specific examples of how to build working high speed
data links, the techniques described in this book are not intended to
replace existing wired infrastructure (such as telephone systems or
fibre optic backbone).

Rather, these techniques are intended to augment existing systems, and
provide connectivity in areas where running fibre or other physical
cable would be impractical.

We hope you find this book useful for solving your communication
challenges.

### Fitting wireless into your existing network

If you are a network administrator, you may wonder how wireless might
fit into your existing network infrastructure.

Wireless can serve in many capacities, from a simple extension (like a
several kilometre Ethernet cable) to a distribution point (like a large
hub).

 

Here just a few examples of how your network can benefit from wireless
technology.

 

![](src/I1.png)

 

Figure I 1: Some wireless networking examples.

 

### How this book is organized

This book has 4 main sections called -

 

 Physics

 Networking

 Planning and Deployment

 Maintenance, Monitoring and Sustainability

At the end you will find a Glossary as well as Appendices and Case
Studies.

Within the 4 main sections there are chapters written by key experts
with theoretical and practical hands on experience of the topics.

There are a broad range of topics in the chapters which have been
selected as being key to enabling you to start and grow a real wireless
deployment in your own community. Another resource you may find useful
is here -

[http://wtkit.org/groups/wtkit/wiki/820cb/download\_page.html](http://wtkit.org/groups/wtkit/wiki/820cb/download_page.html)

 

It is the set of presentation materials used by these same key experts
to deliver wireless networking training classes around the world.

In addition all of the key experts who have written this book regularly
check our Facebook page. So as you plan your deployment please do ask
questions on our page - we do answer quickly.

[https://www.facebook.com/groups/wirelessu](https://www.facebook.com/groups/wirelessu)

 

 
