3. LICENSING AND REGULATION
---------------------------

There are a number of areas where national and international laws and
regulations can influence your ability to set up wireless networks.

Since these rules vary from country to country it is impossible to give
an overview of which regulations may apply in your region.

It is also worth noting that there may be a huge difference in which
laws exist, and how they are regulated in practice. In other words there
may be countries where using the 2.4 GHz / 5 GHz spectrum for outdoor
wireless is technically illegal, but where everyone does it anyway.

As a rule of thumb, if other people are building similar networks to
what you intend, contact them and find out what legal issues they may
have run into. If such networks are very widely deployed in your
country, then you probably don't need to worry too much. On the other
hand, it is always advisable to seek local advice, from hardware
vendors, wireless experts or others who have come before you, before
committing time and resources to building a wireless network. Whatever
you do, it is important you take local laws and regulations into
consideration.

### Examples of relevant types of regulation

Each country may have different rules, and each scenario may come across
different types of regulations. The areas where regulations may be
relevant include licenses for using specific radio frequencies, rules
regarding the right to install towers for antennas, the maximum power
allowed and telecom licensing rules limiting your ability to provide
Internet access to others.

 

The types of legal issues that may (or may not) be worth considering
when planning a wireless network include:

 

-   Spectrum Licensing 

-   ISP/Telecommunications Licenses 

-   Tower permits for antennas 

-   Transmission power and antenna gain limits 

-   Certification of equipment 

-   ISP Terms of Use 

 

Spectrum Licensing

Most countries consider RF spectrum as an exclusive property of the
state. The RF spectrum is a national resource, much like water, land,
gas and minerals. Unlike these, however, RF is reusable. The purpose of
spectrum management is to mitigate radio spectrum pollution and maximize
the benefit of usable radio spectrum.

The first sentence of the International Telecommunications Union (ITU)
constitution fully recognises “the sovereign right of each State to
regulate its telecommunication”. Effective spectrum management requires
regulation at national, regional and global levels.

Licensing is an orderly way to manage who, when, where and how spectrum
resource is used. The unlicensed wireless spectrum was set around the
2.4 GHz band.

In June 2003, the ITU made available the 5 GHz band for license-exempt
technology deployment. The 900 MHz band, unlicensed in the United
States, is presently used in Western Europe and in many developing
countries for GSM phones. Each country has the sovereign right to
regulate its telecommunication and to interpret the international Radio
Regulations. Governments define the rules and conditions of the
frequency use.

(From: Wikipedia "Spectrum Management")

 

The technologies described in this book (mostly) use a license-exempt
slice of the spectrum referred to as the ISM (Industrial, Scientific and
Medical radio bands). Radio frequencies in the ISM bands have been used
for communication purposes, although such devices may experience
interference from non-communication sources.

The ISM bands are defined by the ITU-R (ITU's Radiocommunication Sector)
at 2.4 and 5 GHz. Individual countries' use of the bands designated in
these sections may differ due to variations in national radio
regulations. Because communication devices using the ISM bands must
tolerate any interference from ISM equipment, unlicensed operations are
typically permitted to use these bands, since unlicensed operation
typically needs to be tolerant of interference from other devices
anyway.

In the US, the FCC (Federal Communications Commission) first made
unlicensed spread spectrum available in the ISM bands in rules adopted
on May 9, 1985. Many other countries later adopted these FCC
regulations, enabling use of this technology in many countries.

(From: Wikipedia "ISM Band")

ISP/Telecommunications Licenses

In some countries an ISP license would be required before deploying any
network infrastructure for sharing networks over public spaces. In other
countries this would only be required to run commercial networks.

 

Tower permits for antennas

When deploying long-range outdoor networks, it is often necessary to
build a tower for the antenna. Many countries have regulations regarding
the building of such antenna-towers if they are more than 5 or 10 metres
above the roof or ground.

 

Transmission Power limits

When setting transmission power limits, regulatory agencies generally
use the Equivalent Isotropically Radiated Power (EIRP), as this is the
power actually radiated by the antenna element. Power limits can be
imposed on output power of devices as well.

As an example, the FCC enforces certain rules regarding the power
radiated by the antenna element, depending on whether the implementation
is point-to-multipoint (PtMp) or point-to-point (PtP). It also enforces
certain rules regarding the maximum power transmitted by the radio.

When an omnidirectional antenna is used, the FCC automatically considers
the link a PtMP link. In the setup of a 2.4 GHz PtMP link, the FCC
limits the EIRP to 4 Watts and the power limit set for the intentional
radiator is 1 Watt.

 

Things are more complicated in the 5 Ghz band. The Unlicensed National
Information Infrastructure (U-NII) radio band is part of the radio
frequency spectrum used by IEEE-802.11a devices and by many wireless
ISPs. It operates over three ranges:

 

        U-NII Low (U-NII-1): 5.15-5.25 GHz. Regulations require use of
an integrated antenna. Power limited to 50 mW.

        U-NII Mid (U-NII-2): 5.25-5.35 GHz. Regulations allow for a
user-installable antenna, subject to Dynamic Frequency Selection (DFS,
or radar avoidance). Power limited to 250 mW.

        U-NII Worldwide: 5.47-5.725 GHz. Both outdoor and indoor use,
subject to Dynamic Frequency Selection (DFS, or radar avoidance). Power
limited to 250 mW.

This spectrum was added by the FCC in 2003 to "align the frequency bands
used by U-NII devices in the United States with bands in other parts of
the world".

The FCC currently has an interim limitation on operations on channels
which overlap the 5600 - 5650 MHz band.

 

        U-NII Upper (U-NII-3): 5.725 to 5.825 GHz.

Sometimes referred to as U-NII / ISM due to overlap with the ISM band.
Regulations allow for a user-installable antenna. Power limited to 1W.

Wireless ISPs generally use 5.725-5.825 GHz.

(From: Wikipedia "U-NII")

 

For PtP in the 5 GHz band the maximum EIRP allowed is considerable
higher, since a high gain antenna produces a very narrow beam and
therefore the interference caused to other users is considerably less
than in PtMPt topology.

 

Certification of equipment

Governments may require a formal certification that a given radio
equipment comply with specific technical standards and local
regulations.

This is often referred to as homologation, and the process must be done
by an independent laboratory authorised by the government of the
country.

Certified equipment is allowed to operate without an individual license.
It is worth noting that certification may only apply to the original
factory state for radio equipment.

For example, changing the antenna on a wireless access point in the
United States invalidates the FCC Certification.

 

ISP Terms of Use

Many ISP's include in their "Terms of Use" a clause that prohibits users
from sharing an internet connection with other users.

There may also be commercial grade connections that do not have these
limitations.

It is important to note that this is NOT a legal issue, but a clause of
the contract with the ISP, and the repercussions for breaching these is
usually a disconnection of the Internet connection.
